TT DBG Quickstart (#99)
dbos-inc/dbos-docs: docs/getting-started/quickstart-tt-debugging.md

---
sidebar_position: 3
title: Time Travel Debugging Quickstart
---

Now that we've learned a little about programming DBOS, let's learn how to use the DBOS time travel debugger!

This quickstart assumes you are using for [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) and have the 

> [DBOS Time Travel Debugger Extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=dbos-inc.dbos-ttdbg) installed.

Reviewer: We can't assume they have the extension installed in the quickstart. Maybe explain how to install it?

Reviewer 2: Second this: we can put existing extension installation guide (shorten a bit) from the cloud tutorial here.

:::info
If you're not a VS Code user, please see the [Time Travel Debugging with DBOS CLI](../cloud-tutorials/timetravel-debugging#time-travel-with-dbos-sdk-cli-non-vs-code-users) tutorial.
:::

> Additionally, this quickstart assume you have finished the [programming quickstart](./quickstart-programming).

Reviewer: This is quickstart--Instead of making all these assumptions, I think we should provide concise directions to download it from GitHub, set it up, and deploy it to the cloud

Author: I thought it was better to build on the previous step rather than start from `create`, but I can definetly have the developer take out the 5 second wait

Reviewer: I don't think we should assume people go through the tutorials in sequential order.

Author: The [programming quickstart](https://docs.dbos.dev/getting-started/quickstart-programming) "assumes you've finished our [quickstart](https://docs.dbos.dev/getting-started/quickstart)". Shouldn't we continue that in this quickstart?

Reviewer: The programming quickstart also provides instructions on exactly how to set it up from scratch--I think we want the same thing here.

Author: It feels weird to repeat those instructions a third time. Please take a look at the latest revision and let me know if you think we need to repeat the `dbos-sdk init` instructions again

Reviewer: It's better, but I still think it would be simpler and clearer if we made a new template and just said "run this command to get the code" instead of telling you to go to your old code (or a git repository) and edit it. Those additional steps, especially modifying the code, add needless friction.

You also need to deploy the app to DBOS Cloud.
If you finished the [DBOS quickstart](./quickstart), you should already have a DBOS Cloud account and database instance.
You can then deploy the programming quickstart by executing these commands from project's root folder:

```
npx dbos-cloud app register -d <database-instance-name>
npx dbos-cloud app deploy
```

:::info
DBOS Cloud database instances can host multiple applications databases.
Even if you deployed the DBOS quickstart app, you can also deploy the programming quickstart using the same database instance.
:::

When complete, the `dbos-cloud app deploy` command will print your application's URL to the console.
Visit `<APP_URL>/greeting/dbos` in your browser a few times to generate data that we can use to demonstrate the time travel debugger.

:::tip
The `GreetingWorkflow` function from the programming quickstart sleeps in a loop for 5 seconds so you can terminate DBOS and test automatic recovery.
Unless you remove that sleep loop before deploying to DBOS Cloud, visiting `<APP_URL>/greeting/dbos` will take at least 5 seconds to process.

> The sleep loop is not used in this quickstart, so feel free to remove it and `dbos-cloud app deploy` the updated app if desired.

Reviewer 2: We can remove this tip if we use a code template (with removed sleep 5 sec).

:::

### Time Travel Debugging Your Cloud Application

After you have installed the DBOS VS Code extension and deployed the programming quickstart to DBOS Cloud, open up the project folder in VS Code then open the `src/operations.ts` file in the editor. 

> Set breakpoints at the top of each of the functions in the `operations.ts` file: `GreetingWorkflow`, `InsertGreeting`, `SendGreetingEmail`.

Reviewer: Maybe explain how to set a breakpoint?

2024-03-22 23:03:45 [info]: Press control + C to interrupt the workflow... 
2024-03-22 23:03:45 [info]: Press control + C to interrupt the workflow... 
2024-03-22 23:03:45 [info]: Press control + C to interrupt the workflow... 
2024-03-22 23:03:45 [info]: Press control + C to interrupt the workflow... 
2024-03-22 23:03:46 [info]: before count 2
2024-03-22 23:03:47 [info]: after count 3 
2024-03-22 23:03:47 [info]: Greeting sent to friend! 
```

To clarify what has happened here, you modified the InsertGreeting function to retrieve database state and log it.
Then, you executed that updated code in the Time Travel Debugger working against _past database state_.
Note, this worked even though your local code is different from the code running in DBOS Cloud!

:::warning
When time travel debugging, you can freely add read queries to your application and observe their results when run against past database state.
This state can be viewed via the logger as described above or via VS Code's variables window.
However, you cannot change code that updates database state (i.e. insert/delete/update SQL statements) or change the value returned from 
a workflow or transaction function.

> :::

Reviewer 2: At the end, we can link to the debugger cloud tutorial for more complex debugging use cases.

For convenience, we recommend [creating a DBOS Cloud account](./quickstart#deploying-to-dbos-cloud) and 
[provisioning a DBOS Cloud database instance](./quickstart#provisioning-a-cloud-database-instance) before starting this tutorial.

### Installing the DBOS Time Travel Debugging VS Code Extension

Before we use the DBOS Time Travel debugger, we need to install its VS Code extension.

To install the extension, navigate to the [extension's web page](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=dbos-inc.dbos-ttdbg) and press the "Install" button. 
This will launch VS Code and open the DBOS Time Travel Debugger extension page inside the IDE. 
From there, select the "Install" button to install the extension.

![Installing the DBOS Extension](./assets//ttdbg-install.png)

:::info
You can also install the extension by opening the [Extension Marketplace](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/extension-marketplace) 
inside VS Code (default keybinding: Ctrl+Shift+X / ⇧⌘X) and searching for "DBOS".
:::

### Deploy the Programming Quickstart App to DBOS Cloud

This tutorial uses with the application you built for the [Programming Quickstart](./quickstart-programming). 

> If you didn't finish that tutorial, the code is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/dbos-inc/dbos-demo-apps/tree/main/greeting-emails).

Reviewer 2: I think we can put a `dbos create` command here:
```suggestion
If you didn't finish that tutorial, you can create the app by running the `[dbos create]` command
```

Author: Is it enough to tell the reader to `dbos create` w/o also repeating instructions for adding the code from programming quickstart ?
